---
title: "Gene expression in the face of chronic pollution: The case of <i>Basilichthys microlepidotus</i> in the Maipo River basin."
collection: talks
type: "Conference"
permalink: /talks/2021-02-01-talk-2
venue: "I Latin American Congress of Evolution"
date: 2021-12-02
location: "Online"
---

[CLEVOL Page](https://www.clevol2021.com)

Within the elements of global change, pollution and in particular that which affects freshwater systems, is very relevant due to its direct impact on natural populations. Regarding the estimation of effects at the biological level of pollution, one approach is the identification of genes that change their expression to be used as biomarkers. However, few works have focused on natural populations, which can experience chronic conditions of pollution in most cases. In this work, relevant genes and pathways that showed their expression altered as a product of chronic pollution were identified (through RNA-seq), in liver and gills of <i>Basilichthys microlepidotus</i>, a fish endemic to Chile that inhabits the Maipo River basin. 4 sites were analyzed, 3 polluted (IM, MEL and PEL) and one unpolluted (SFM), collecting 6 individuals per site. In liver, 13 differentially expressed contigs shared by the 3 polluted sites were identified, in addition, overrepresentation of processes associated with cell division, tryptophan metabolism and immune response was observed. In the case of gills, 9 differentially expressed contigs shared by the 3 polluted sites were identified, also overrepresentation of processes associated with cellular respiration, immune response, in addition to cytoskeleton was observed. In this work we have identified some pathways and genes that could be relevant in conditions of chronic pollution, which could shed clues about the adaptation of organisms to this condition and allow developing better biomonitoring plans.
